Former PhD students - BEC lab webpage

Alice Ledent (mini description for the "Team page")
After defending her PhD thesis focusing on unravelling the Quaternary biogeographic history of bryophytes in June 2019, under the supervision of Alain Vanderpoorten and Patrick Mardulyn (ULB), Alice Ledent is now assistant for the Pr. Pascal Poncin (ULiège), where she mainly develops new pedagogical tools in biology.

Alice Ledent (description for the personal page)
Alice first joined Alain Vanderpoorten’s team as a Master student in 2014, before starting a PhD as a F.R.S.-FNRS Aspirant (ASP) in 2015 with Pr. Patrick Mardulyn (ULB) as co-supervisor. Her work focused on unravelling the Quaternary biogeographic history of bryophytes in contrasted landscapes: in Europe, where mountain ranges are acting as effective barriers to migration for many organisms, and in Amazonia, where the landscape is homogeneous without any apparent geographic barrier to migration. To contrast competing evolutionary scenarios for populations inhabiting these regions, she employed an integrative method relying on both ecological niche modeling (SDMs) and coalescent-based phylogenetic inference (ABCtoolbox) on genomic data (RADseq). She spent the last year of her PhD in Love Dalen’s lab (Center for Paleogenetics, CPG, Stockholm, Sweden) where she expanded her range of competences in population genetics with specific ancient DNA (aDNA) lab and bioinformatic tools. After successfully defending her PhD thesis in June 2019, she became an assistant for the Pr. Pascal Poncin (ULiège), where she mainly develops innovative pedagogical tools in biology, including 3D models, MOOCs, and interactive quiz. Besides, she is currently still involved in some researches of Alain Vanderpoorten’s team, notably on the historical biogeography of Amazonian bryophytes.

Flavien Collart (mini description for the "Team page")
Flavien’s research focuses on species distribution across space and time by characterizing species climatic niches and also by taking their dispersal capacities into account, mainly in the Alpine region and in the Canary Islands. He mainly works on bryophytes but also on the other land plant groups.

Flavien Collart (description for the personal page)
Flavien first joined Alain Vanderpoorten’s lab as a master student in 2017, working on the underlying mechanism of the non-application of Rapoport’s rule on bryophytes along an altitudinal gradient, using notably species distribution models and experimental transplants. During his Master thesis, he had the chance to realize an Erasmus internship in Antoine Guisan’s lab at the University of Lausanne (UniL) in Switzerland. In 2018, he got the FRIA grant from the FRS-FNRS and started a PhD with Alain Vanderpoorten and Antoine Guisan as co-supervisors. His doctoral research focused on predicting the dynamics of range shifts under climate change and testing the related assumptions. He finished his PhD in 2021 and directly started a 3-year postdoc position at the UniL in Antoine Guisan’s lab. He is currently working on the Gen4Mig project which is about integrating species distribution modelling and spatially coalescent simulations in order to (1) reconstruct the biogeographic histories of several alpine land plants since the Last Glacial Maximum; (2) determine the recolonization rates that occur in the past; and (3) use these rates to test if species will be able to track their future suitable area in a climate change context. In parallel, he is working with Jairo Patiño from the University of La Laguna in Tenerife to notably model the past, present and future distribution of the laurisylva and vulnerable plants at fine spatial scale.

Florian Zanatta (mini description for the "Team page")
Florian Zanatta used to be a PhD student at Alain Vanderpoorten’s lab, focusing his research on a new framework for dynamic ecological niche models. He is now working at Meise Botanic Garden and involved in a local citizen ecology lab he cofounded called “lacYme”.

Florian Zanatta (description for the personal page)
Florian focused his PhD thesis research on the development of a new framework for dynamic ecological niche models integrating species specific and spatially explicit dispersal kernels. This approach based on wind physics, land cover, climatic variables and ecophysiology of bryophytes, was developed to explore the potential colonization capacity of these (mainly) wind dispersed plants at large scale, in a context of climate changes.
Now working at Meise Botanic Garden since 2020, he extended the scope of his research on bryophyte dispersal ecology towards studying spore morphological variations at intra- and inter-specific levels using SEM photography and statistical morphometrics analysis. With this project in collaboration with Alain Vanderpoorten, they aim at exploring functional and evolutionary implications of spore ornamentations and morphological variations among this whole group.
He is also developing citizen-science based research projects and activities, as part of a local citizen ecology lab in Liège called "lacYme", which he co-founded in 2021. The current underlying project is focusing on mapping and monitoring urban biodiversity in order to highlight ecological networks, using various participative and multidisciplinary approaches.
